# ABOUTME: Protobuf::Manual — the task-oriented guide to using the Protobuf
# distribution: schemas, the value data model, wire/JSON codec, classes, editions.

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Protobuf::Manual - a guide to using the Protobuf distribution

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<Protobuf> is a pure-Perl implementation of Protocol Buffers. This manual is the
task-oriented guide: how to get a schema, how message values are represented in
Perl, and how to move them across the wire and through JSON. For the reference
documentation of any one piece, see that module's own POD (linked throughout).

Three ideas carry the whole library:

=over 4

=item * A B<schema> (L<Protobuf::Schema>) is a registry of message, enum, and
service definitions, indexed by fully-qualified name. You build one, then call
C<< ->resolve >> to link every cross-type reference.

=item * A B<message value> is a plain Perl B<hashref keyed by proto field name>.
There is no special object required to hold data — C<< { user_id => 42 } >> is a
complete message value. (Generated classes are an optional convenience on top of
this; see L</"WORKING WITH GENERATED CLASSES">.)

=item * A B<codec> (L<Protobuf::Codec>) is bound to a resolved schema and turns
those hashrefs into wire bytes or JSON, and back.

=back

=head1 QUICK START

Parse a schema from C<.proto> source, resolve it, bind a codec, and round-trip a
value on the wire and as JSON:

    use v5.38;
    use Protobuf::Parser;
    use Protobuf::Codec;

    my $file = Protobuf::Parser->new->parse_string('demo.proto', <<~'PROTO');
        syntax = "proto3";
        package demo;
        message Point { int32 x = 1; int32 y = 2; repeated string tags = 3; }
        PROTO

    my $schema = Protobuf::Schema->new;
    $schema->add_file($file)->resolve;

    my $codec = Protobuf::Codec->new( schema => $schema );

    my $value = { x => 3, y => 4, tags => [ 'a', 'b' ] };

    my $bytes = $codec->encode( 'demo.Point', $value );
    my $back  = $codec->decode( 'demo.Point', $bytes );   # { x => 3, y => 4, tags => [...] }

    my $json  = $codec->encode_json( 'demo.Point', $value );  # {"tags":["a","b"],"x":3,"y":4}
    my $obj   = $codec->decode_json( 'demo.Point', $json );

A runnable version of this lives in F<examples/basic/hello.pl> in the
distribution.

=head1 THE DATA MODEL

A message value is a hashref whose keys are proto field names. Each proto type
maps to a Perl value as follows:

    proto type                Perl value
    -----------------------   --------------------------------------------------
    int32/int64/uint*/sint*   a number (large 64-bit values may be Math::BigInt)
    fixed*/sfixed*            a number
    float/double              a number (NaN/Inf round-trip on the wire)
    bool                      1 or 0 on the wire; true/false in JSON
    string                    a character string (decoded UTF-8)
    bytes                     a raw octet string (no encoding applied)
    enum                      the integer enumerator value
    message                   a nested hashref (recurse)
    repeated <T>              an arrayref of <T> values
    map<K,V>                  a hashref of K => V
    oneof                     set exactly one member field's key in the hashref

=head2 Presence and defaults

proto3 implicit-presence singular scalar fields are B<omitted from the wire when
they hold the type default> (0, empty string, false). On decode, such a field
that never appeared comes back as its default. Fields with explicit presence —
proto3 C<optional>, oneof members, and proto2/editions explicit fields — are
written whenever set (even at the default) and stay B<absent> from the decoded
hashref when they were never on the wire. The codec derives this per field from
the resolved feature set; see L<Protobuf::Schema::Field/presence>.

=head2 oneof

A oneof is represented by simply putting the chosen member's key in the value
hashref. On decode the last member seen on the wire wins, and only that member's
key is present in the result.

=head1 GETTING A SCHEMA

There are three ways to obtain a schema. Whichever you use, call C<< ->resolve >>
before handing it to a codec (L<Protobuf::DescriptorSet> returns one already
resolved).

=head2 1. Parse C<.proto> source (L<Protobuf::Parser>)

For schemas you control as text. C<parse_with_imports> walks C<import>
statements across an include path and returns a whole schema:

    use Protobuf::Parser;

    my $parser = Protobuf::Parser->new( include_paths => [ 'protos' ] );
    my $schema = $parser->parse_with_imports('demo.proto');
    $schema->resolve;

Use C<parse_string($name, $source)> for source held in a string, and
C<parse_file($relative_path)> for a single file resolved against the include
path. See L<Protobuf::Parser>.

=head2 2. Load a protoc descriptor set (L<Protobuf::DescriptorSet>)

For real-world schemas, the most robust route is to let C<protoc> do the parsing
and hand the result to this library as a binary C<FileDescriptorSet>:

    protoc --descriptor_set_out=all.fds --include_imports -I protos protos/*.proto

    use Protobuf::DescriptorSet;
    my $schema = Protobuf::DescriptorSet->load_file('all.fds');   # already resolved
    my $codec  = Protobuf::Codec->new( schema => $schema );

C<load_string($bytes)> takes the descriptor-set bytes directly. This path uses
C<protoc>'s own front end, so it covers everything protoc accepts — including
enums, extensions, and editions.

=head2 3. Build a schema in Perl

For programmatic construction or testing, assemble the model objects directly
and register them:

    use Protobuf::Schema;
    use Protobuf::Schema::File;
    use Protobuf::Schema::Message;
    use Protobuf::Schema::Field;

    my $msg = Protobuf::Schema::Message->new(
        name => 'Point', full_name => 'demo.Point',
        fields => [
            Protobuf::Schema::Field->new( name => 'x', number => 1, type => 'int32' ),
            Protobuf::Schema::Field->new( name => 'y', number => 2, type => 'int32' ),
        ],
    );
    my $file = Protobuf::Schema::File->new(
        name => 'demo.proto', package => 'demo', messages => [ $msg ],
    );

    my $schema = Protobuf::Schema->new;
    $schema->add_file($file)->resolve;

See L<Protobuf::Schema::Message>, L<Protobuf::Schema::Field>,
L<Protobuf::Schema::Enum>, L<Protobuf::Schema::Oneof>, and
L<Protobuf::Schema::File>.

=head1 ENCODING AND DECODING ON THE WIRE

A codec bound to a resolved schema encodes and decodes by fully-qualified
message name:

    my $codec = Protobuf::Codec->new( schema => $schema );

    my $bytes = $codec->encode( 'demo.Order', {
        id         => 'A1',
        items      => [ { name => 'Perl Book', price => 30 } ],  # repeated message
        quantities => { apples => 3, pears => 2 },               # map<string,int32>
        paid       => 1,                                         # bool
    } );

    my $value = $codec->decode( 'demo.Order', $bytes );

Nested messages, repeated fields, and maps recurse through the same entry points,
so arbitrarily deep trees round-trip. Unknown field numbers encountered on decode
are skipped by their wire type and left out of the result. An unknown message
name raises L<Protobuf::Exception::Codec::UnknownType>; a value of the wrong
shape for its field raises L<Protobuf::Exception::Codec::TypeMismatch>. See
L<Protobuf::Codec>.

=head1 JSON

The same value hashref encodes to and decodes from canonical proto3 JSON:

    my $json  = $codec->encode_json( 'demo.Order', $value );
    my $value = $codec->decode_json( 'demo.Order', $json );

Encoding follows the proto3 JSON mapping: field names become C<lowerCamelCase>,
64-bit integers become strings, C<bytes> become base64, enums become their
enumerator name, and implicit-default fields are omitted. Decoding is lenient: it
accepts both C<camelCase> and C<snake_case> keys, both string and number forms
for 64-bit integers, and both the name and the number for enum values.

C<encode_json> accepts options C<enums_as_ints>, C<preserve_field_names> (emit
proto field names instead of camelCase), and C<emit_defaults> (include
implicit-default fields). C<decode_json> accepts C<reject_unknown_fields>. See
L<Protobuf::JSON> for the full rules.

=head1 WELL-KNOWN TYPES

The C<google.protobuf.*> well-known types encode on the wire like any other
message, but several (C<Timestamp>, C<Duration>, C<Struct>, C<Any>, the wrapper
types, ...) have special JSON forms. Register their schemas into your schema and
the JSON layer handles the special forms automatically:

    use Protobuf::WKT;
    Protobuf::WKT->register($schema);

See L<Protobuf::WKT>, L<Protobuf::WKT::Timestamp>, and L<Protobuf::WKT::Duration>.

=head1 WORKING WITH GENERATED CLASSES

Hashrefs are the core data model; generated classes are an ergonomic layer over
them, giving typed accessors plus C<encode>/C<decode> as instance and class
methods.

=head2 At runtime (L<Protobuf::Class::Generator>)

Build a class from a resolved C<Schema::Message> into a package of your choosing:

    use Protobuf::Class::Generator;

    Protobuf::Class::Generator->build(
        schema         => $schema,
        message        => $schema->message('demo.Point'),
        target_package => 'Demo::Point',
    );

    my $p = Demo::Point->new({ x => 3, y => 4, tags => [ 'a', 'b' ] });
    $p->set_x(7)->set_y(9);          # chainable setters
    $p->x;                           # 7
    $p->to_hashref;                  # { x => 7, y => 9, tags => [...] }
    Demo::Point->descriptor;         # the Protobuf::Schema::Message

    my $bytes = $p->encode;          # wire bytes
    my $back  = Demo::Point->decode($bytes);   # a Demo::Point instance

A field whose name collides with a Perl keyword gets a trailing underscore on its
accessor (e.g. C<package_>); see L<Protobuf::Class::Accessor>.

=head2 Ahead of time (C<protobuf-gen-perl>)

To commit generated modules to a project, render one C<.pm> per C<.proto> with
the bundled generator:

    protobuf-gen-perl \
        --include protos \
        --output  lib \
        --package-prefix My::Api \
        demo.proto

Each emitted module reconstructs its schema statically and installs its classes
through the same L<Protobuf::Class::Generator> path, so it carries no parser or
descriptor-set dependency at runtime and cannot drift from the runtime behavior.
See L<Protobuf::Class::Codegen>.

=head1 PROTO2, PROTO3, AND EDITIONS

Despite the name, the library is not limited to proto3. It passes the Google
conformance suite at protobuf v34 across B<proto2>, B<proto3>, and
B<editions 2023>. The syntax/edition dimension is modeled as a resolved
B<feature set> (L<Protobuf::Schema::Features>) covering field presence, enum
openness (open vs. closed), repeated encoding (packed vs. expanded), message
encoding (length-prefixed vs. delimited/group), and UTF-8 validation. Each
edition supplies defaults; a file, message, enum, or field may override them, and
C<< $schema->resolve >> folds the layers into one effective feature set per
element. The codec reads that resolved set rather than branching on syntax, so
the same encode/decode code serves all three.

=head1 ERROR HANDLING

Failures throw exception objects under L<Protobuf::Exception> (parse, resolve,
wire, codec, and JSON families), each with a C<message>. Catch them with an
C<eval>/C<try> and inspect C<< $@->isa(...) >>:

    use Protobuf::Codec;
    use Protobuf::Exception;

    my $value = eval { $codec->decode('demo.Point', $bytes) };
    if ( my $err = $@ ) {
        die "decode failed: " . $err->message
            if ref $err && $err->isa('Protobuf::Exception');
        die $err;
    }

=head1 CONFORMANCE

The distribution ships a conformance testee, C<protobuf-conformance>, that speaks
the Google C<conformance_test_runner> stdio protocol, plus the harness under
F<t/conformance/> that gates CI against the v34 suite. See
L<Protobuf::Conformance>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Protobuf>, L<Protobuf::Parser>, L<Protobuf::DescriptorSet>, L<Protobuf::Schema>,
L<Protobuf::Codec>, L<Protobuf::JSON>, L<Protobuf::WKT>,
L<Protobuf::Class::Generator>, L<Protobuf::Class::Codegen>,
L<Protobuf::Schema::Features>, L<Protobuf::Exception>.

The Protocol Buffers language and wire format themselves are documented at
L<https://protobuf.dev>.

=head1 LICENSE

This software is licensed under the MIT license. See the F<LICENSE> file.

=cut
